Graciously written by u/BetterGeiger, originally posted at: 

https://old.reddit.com/r/preppers/comments/uzdl8z/i_have_tried_to_write_a_massive_qa_to_cover_all/

First of all, there is an incredible amount of high quality and easy to understand information here, I highly encourage you all to explore it: https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/radiation/emergencies/index.htm

I've done several AMAs in recent months and answered many hundreds of questions, feel free to read through my post history, or ask questions here if you have any. My PhD is in nuclear engineering and most of my career was radiation detection R&amp;D and related topics.

I also sell detectors - www.bettergeiger.com ... I'm nearly caught up on back orders but I'm low on raw materials. Based on when resupply is expected I should be shipping all ongoing order the last week of July. I talk about detector options in some of the questions below. I've tried to be as unbiased as possible about various pros/cons, you can read and decide for yourself.

Oh and I also post radiation-related stuff on twitter: https://twitter.com/bettergeiger

I am working on building up the information on my web site to help people get a basic understand of radiation and related topics, and to help folks decide whether or not the Better Geiger is right for them. Below I’ve rather quickly written some Q&amp;A type material, some of that information is on the web site already and some not. It’s basically a quick first draft on a lot of topics I want to cover, and I am posting it here with the hope of seeing what questions pop up so I can fill in gaps and improve my explanations before I improve the writing quality and put it on my website. Feedback and questions would be greatly appreciated. Please also note that a few details are simplified for clarity, so if a physicist reads this they might nitpick at some words here and there, but that streamlining was necessary for brevity and understandability. For many of these questions I’m trying to just hit some key points, but there is a lot more which could be said.

Here goes…

What is radiation? Radiation is a lot of things, but here we are interested in “ionizing radiation” which means the stuff that can ionize atoms and molecules and can also cause cell damage. I will just call it “radiation” from here on out, but in other contexts “radiation” could mean thermal radiation or other rather unrelated phenomena. That cell damage I mentioned is important because if you are exposed to very high levels of radiation then you can have an increased risk of cancer. However, it takes very high levels for that risk level to significantly go up. At really extreme levels you can even experience acute effects (radiation sickness) or even death.

Where does radiation come from? We are exposed to low levels of radiation all the time by things like materials in our environment, common medical procedures like X-rays, and even the food we eat. These baseline levels are generally nothing to be concerned about. When we are exposed to an elevated amount of radiation outside of a medical procedure it’s generally because specific materials are in an unstable state and they are decaying back to a stable state by emitting radiation. If you hear about a “Cobalt-60” source, for example, it means a particular isotope of Cobalt which is unstable and is emitting radiation. There are many, many different materials which emit radiation and they are in very tiny quantities here and there, such as potassium in bananas or your granite countertop, or thorium in soil.

What are the main types of radiation relevant to my safety? Alpha, beta, x-ray, gamma. Some might put neutron on this list but neutron irradiation is not ordinarily present, and even in a nuclear blast it is usually a very minor part of what poses a threat to your health.

What is the “energy” of a given type of radiation? Each of those radiation types should not be thought of as a wave travelling in the ocean or a pressure wave from an explosion or something like that. If there is a “gamma field” it actually means a bunch of individual gamma photons flying around. Same for alpha particles, neutrons, or X-ray photons. It’s always a bunch of individual things. Each of those individual things has a specific energy. More energy means exactly what it sounds like, and typically means they will be harder to stop (or more penetrating) and will be more damaging when they interact with living things. Sometimes radiation is emitted from a source at a specific energy (notably gamma rays), and sometimes it is a spectrum, for example beta particles being emitted over a wide range of energies randomly from 0 up to a maximum depending on the material which is radioactive, although each individual beta particle will have one specific energy (until it loses energy and is stopped). Most of the time energies are indicated in units of keV (kilolectron volt) or MeV (megaelectron volt), with 1000 keV being equal to 1 MeV. Typical energies of things we are interested in go up to around a few MeV or so. For example, Cesium-137 is a well-known material which emits gamma rays at 662 keV or 0.662 MeV.

What is alpha radiation? Alpha radiation consists of alpha particles, each of which is a helium nucleus flying around, which is a type of “heavy charged particle.” That means they do not travel far before being stopped. In air that can mean just a couple feet or so, but solid material as thin as a sheet of paper, or your clothing, will stop them entirely. Because of that, it is of almost zero threat to your health unless you ingest or breath in an alpha-emitting material such that it can deposit energy directly in your internal organs.

What is beta radiation? Beta radiation is basically highly energetic electrons. They are charged, like alpha particles, but they are lighter and therefore travel further than alpha particles and are harder to stop, although they are still very easily stopped. They will lose a lot of energy in clothing if not stopped entirely. A glass window or a few layers of aluminum foil or almost any substantial material will stop them entirely. Therefore, like alpha particles, they are typically a very minimal threat to your health unless you ingest or inhale a material which is emitting beta radiation.

What is X-ray/gamma radiation? X-rays and gammas are energetic photons. Photons are tricky, they’re a wave but can be treated as a particle also. In the context here they are more easily considered as particles flying around. X-rays and gammas are identical entities, but one photon is referred to as either an X-ray or a gamma photon depends on how it was produced (an electron shell process vs. a nuclear process). Despite popular belief, both exist from very low to very high energies. In terms of health effects, or anything else, there is no difference between one or the other if they are the same energy. In most emergency situations gamma are what is mainly relevant. X-rays/gamma are quite penetrating (especially at higher energies) and they tend to bounce around and deposit their energy over rather large distances. If a hundred gamma photons enter a brick wall, perhaps on average 10 will pass through, or 20, or 90… it depends on the energy of the gammas and the material and thickness of the wall. Generally dense things are better at stopping radiation, and things with a high “Z-number” on the periodic table, meaning lead is particularly excellent. An ordinary home wall tends to not stop a lot, but thick layers of earth will stop the vast majority of X-rays/gammas that try to pass through.

What is radiation “dose” or “dose rate”? Radiation dose is a single quantity which attempts to take any type of radiation at any energy energies, including what part of your body is exposed to it, and boil it down to a single number which indicates the health impact of a given amount of radiation. That’s the dose. If you measure this for X-ray/gamma it is generally assumed that the position where you measure it is the same as what your whole body is exposed to. Unless you are doing extremely specialized work, measuring alpha/beta count rates with a detector and trying to convert to dose rate will give wildly inaccurate numbers, but more on that later. The dose rate is how much dose you are receiving per unit time, usually on an hourly basis.

What are the units of “dose”? The most commonly used unit is “Sievert” (Sv) although in the US “rem” is commonly used. One Sievert equals 100 rem. The smaller version, microsievert – one one millionth of a Sievert - is usually more convenient because one Sievert is an enormous dose. That microsievert is often casually referred to as “uSv” although that “u” should really be μ , the Greek lower case symbol mu for micro, to be proper, but it’s usually quicker and easier to write “uSv”. Similarly one thousandth of a rem - a millirem or mrem – is commonly more convenient to use. In your day-to-day life you might be exposed very roughly from 0.02 to 0.2 uSv/hr, but outside that range is very possible. A chest X-ray might expose you to 100 uSv. Also millisievert or mSv is sometimes used, one thousandth of a Sievert (1000x more than a uSv).

How much radiation dose is “bad”? Officially speaking, regulations typically say that any amount of radiation, no matter how tiny, corresponds to a little bit of risk, but arguably the scientific consensus is that at low levels there is no proven risk or - at the very least, at low levels the risk is so tiny it’s essentially negligible. Dose can also be separated into “acute” (in a short time) and “chronic” (spread out over longer time). The same dose spread out over time gives your cells more chance to recover and lower chance of inducing cancer. Here we will focus on acute because that’s usually what emergency circumstances entail. A person who is exposed to radiation as part of their job is generally allowed up to 50 mSv per year, so regulators seem to think that entails a pretty minimal risk. A few more examples taken from the CDC web site for acute dose - at around 500 mSv blood cells can be damaged. At around 1000 mSv (1 Sv) there is a chance of acute radiation sickness and the risk of getting fatal cancer increases from about 22% to 27% (depending on the circumstances, in an emergency situation that might be the least of your concerns). At around 4 Sv you have a 50% chance of death. At around 10 Sv your chance of death is around 100%.

What are the types of radiological incidents and their risks? The main scenarios to consider are an accident at a nuclear power plant, a radiological dispersion device (“RDD” or “dirty bomb”, which means an explosion intentionally spreading radioactive material for terroristic purposes), or a nuclear weapon blast. If you don’t live near a nuclear power plant, you have essentially no risk to be exposed by an accident at one. Even if you live near one the risk level is extremely tiny – for example, at the time of writing this there was one confirmed radiation-related death from the Fukushima accident and 2,202 deaths from the evacuation process. A “dirty bomb” would be a psychological terror but for the most part is a very limited threat to physical health, it's simply not practical to transport and disperse a quantity of radioactive material that can threaten a large area or a large number of people. The explosion part would likely be much more destructive to health than the radiation part. Finally, that leaves a nuclear weapon incident, elaborated upon in the next sections.

How far away do I need to be from a nuclear blast to be safe? I have been asked this question many times in many different ways. The unfortunate reality is that there is a wide range of scenarios and really no straightforward answer that can be given. Even a rough rule of thumb is hard to give. A blast can be very large or very small, surface or air burst, wind direction can vary, your location in the time immediately following (for example outside vs. in a basement) can have a large impact, and so forth. I would personally guess if you are roughly 10+ miles away from a blast you are probably going to be fine, but measures should still be taken to reduce risk. If you are closer you might be fine, too. Hard to say. In any case you should follow official guidance from emergency personnel in such scenarios. It's good to have a working battery-operated radio at home.

What happens after a nuclear blast and what should I immediately do? Initial effects include a flash, a fireball, and a shockwave. There is also an initial burst of radiation but this is generally not going to be as important as other radiological effects and can usually be neglected. Radioactive material will be dispersed in the air and will spread according to various weather factors, particularly wind direction. This is usually referred to as “fallout” (it “falls out” of the sky). This is physical material which will mostly settle on the ground, perhaps on your roof, car, etc. Also on you if you're outside. Physically it is nothing mystical, you might think of it as dust or dirt. The material is emitting radiation, so it is important that you do what you can to avoid ingesting it or inhaling it, and secondarily avoiding that it gets on your skin or clothes. This is where a mask or ventilator would be very important (even a simple surgical mask). Surface decontamination might be appropriate. That can be as simple as removing your clothes outside your home, hosing yourself down, and going inside to don clean clothes. Generally one should go to a basement as soon as possible because it means thick layers of earth will shield you from the vast majority of the fallout nearby. Generally, you want to turn of fans or other home ventilation systems to minimize particles going from outside to inside. If you can’t get to a basement, middle of the building is best, meaning center of ground floor for a 1-2 story building or the middle floor in a larger building (for example, in a 10 story building I would go to the center of the fifth floor). Basement is much better, though.

When is it safe to go outside? This is another question which is impossible to give a general answer to. First, safe is a vague term. If you are located near a blast then “safe” can probably be interpreted as “the time at which the radiation dose rate outside is at a fairly low and nonhazardous level or at a point where it is preferable for me to travel far away from the blast location to get away from radiation, as opposed to staying sheltered until the levels outside die down a bit.” If you are far enough away from a blast location it might be safe to be outside right away. If you are fairly close, it is probably best to wait at least a few days before venturing outside. It is worth noting that radiation levels drop extremely quickly, especially in the first days, and then after that they very slowly start to level off. This is the point where a radiation detector might be pretty useful to know what’s going, but first and foremost follow guidance of authorities.

What does a radiation detector basically do? Earlier we said that radiation is individual things flying around. A radiation detector has a sensitive element inside and it counts those things as they interact. That give something like counts per minute (CPM). Some detectors can also take each interaction and estimate the energy of the particle which interacted, which gives extra information. Except for very exotic devices, detectors generally count one or several of alpha, beta, and X-ray/gamma. Some detectors can measure just X-ray/gamma. Some of those can also count beta. Some of those beta-sensitive ones can also count alpha. To measure alpha is more challenging from a design standpoint because the wall of the sensitive element has to be extremely thin to not stop the alphas before they are registered.

What is a radiation detector actually measuring? The first important thing to understand is that if you are primarily measuring alpha and/or beta you are NOT measuring a dose rate even if the detector in your hand gives you a dose rate number. As mentioned before, alpha/beta do not travel far or through much of anything, including your body, and therefore external exposure (not ingested/inhaled) generally has a minimal health consequence. There are very complicated ways to estimate alpha/beta dose in special circumstances, but no amateur will ever encounter those. Usually the purpose of measuring alpha/beta is searching for spots of surface contamination where radioactive material might be. For example, you might move a detector up and down your body, and then notice a spot where the detector goes crazy and gives a high count rate. That might clue you in to clean that area. This search for contamination is a good thing to do but you cannot numerically estimate any kind of dose rate from that procedure. Similarly, if you ingest or inhale anything radioactive you cannot measure how much or what the dose rate is, that’s simply information you cannot obtain. Ingestion is very dangerous and should be avoided, but the good news is that masks are pretty effective at preventing that. Surface contamination should also be avoided but it’s much less of a hazard, and the good news is that it’s easy to identify and decontaminate and remove. A detector can be good to verify decontamination. An important point to understand about surface decontamination is that fallout material emits X-rays/gammas/betas/alphas all at once because it is a mix of many different radioactive materials. Therefore, a surface contamination can be identified with just an X-ray/gamma detector. An alpha or beta-sensitive detector will be much faster in identifying surface contamination because the response of the detector will be more localized to where the contamination is, but with X-ray/gamma radiation the same job can essentially still be accomplished. If you bring an X-ray/gamma detector near a contaminant the levels should spike. If I were planning to evaluate a large number of people for surface contamination I would want a detector which is sensitive to beta particles and not just X-ray/gamma (I still wouldn’t care about alpha) so that I could do it very quickly and efficiently, but if I were just worried about myself or a small group of people I would be quite content with just an X-ray/gamma detector. Another important point is that detectors generally can’t distinguish between alpha/beta/X-ray/gamma interactions on their own. In order to separate these radiation types in the reading the user has to put a physical shield on the sensitive element. That brings us to the next topic of what a dosimeter is.

What is a radiation dosimeter? A radiation dosimeter is basically a radiation detector that indicates dose rate. A detector which can measure alpha/beta can also often act as a dosimeter but it will only be accurate if alpha/beta particles are being blocked. Many detectors have a removable cover to block alpha/beta in order to just measure X-ray/gamma. If a detector is picking up a lot of beta particles then the dose number will be nonsense. A dosimeter essentially measures X-ray/gamma levels and converts that into a dose rate. This is a very common misunderstanding amongst hobbyists and amateurs, where alpha/beta measurements give a high count rate on a device, which the device converts to dose rate, and then the user interprets the dose rate as meaningful when in reality it is not, because the user is expected to understand how to correctly use the device. Alpha/beta must be shielded if you want to get a meaningful dose measurement!

What is a Geiger counter? A Geiger counter uses a “Geiger-Mueller tube” or “GM” or “GM tube”, and when radiation interacts with the Geiger tube it can produce an electrical signal which the detector counts. Most low-cost tubes cannot measure alpha because the tube needs a very thin wall to allow them to enter into the tube (complicated and expensive to manufacture). Most can measure beta. If alpha/beta are blocked then most tubes allow you to convert the count rate into an approximate estimate of dose rate. This dose rate will probably be a decent estimate but because a Geiger-Mueller tube cannot tell the difference between high and low energy X-ray/gamma the accuracy can have some trouble. The typical problem is that they are often calibrated using Cs-137 (fairly high energy) but many radiation fields are much lower energy on average, which causes the detector to over-estimate dose rate. For a rough value, though, it is generally fine… as long as alpha/beta contribution is not being misinterpreted! Geiger tubes are fairly large most of the time, and size is important to being good at picking up alpha/beta, so they are usually particularly good at surface contamination type measurements. Even a cheap GM tube is usually a pretty good beta detector. A “pancake” type GM is perhaps the gold standard there, because it’s basically a big flat Geiger tube which has a high surface area to catch alpha and usually beta as well… but that detector type tends to be expensive. The main downside to Geiger devices is that the tubes are gas-filled (low density) meaning X-ray/gamma tend to pass through without interaction, resulting in fairly low sensitivity. The secondary downside is the possible inaccuracies previously discussed. The main upside is that you get a decent beta detector even with a cheap GM device. If you are in a high radiation field the low sensitivity is not a real concern. If you are in a very very high field, though, you can run into problems because GM tubes tend to saturate fairly easily, meaning they have an upper limit to dose rate measurements. There are some really terrible low cost options Geiger counters out there which I would recommend avoiding. The GMC line is probably the gold standard of cheap Geiger counters, starting in the roughly $100-150 range. At higher prices there are many more options and most are pretty good. At around $500-600 or so you can get a pancake style detector.

What is a scintillator detector? This kind of detector uses a solid scintillator. When radiation interacts with the scintillator, a tiny burst of light is created, which can be measured. That allows counting the interactions and also getting an idea of the energy – more light means more energy deposited. For X-ray/gamma dose measurements this means there can be energy correction, improving accuracy. Being a solid, it also tends to stop a lot more X-ray/gamma, resulting in more sensitivity. Depending on the scintillator, it might also allow higher count rates than a GM device, which sometimes means higher upper limit on dose rate before saturation. Historically these were much more expensive. As far as I know I’m the first and currently only to offer such a detector starting at the same price point as a low-cost Geiger counter (~$120 at www.bettergeiger.com ). By the way, there is an optional rubber shock-absorber and waterproof enclosure. It uses the word “Geiger” (long story why) but it does not use a traditional Geiger tube at all, it uses a solid scintillator. The main downside is that the scintillator is quite small compared to a GM device, so beta sensitivity is much lower. As mentioned before, beta measurement is usually not essential in an emergency for an individual, but having high beta sensitivity doesn't hurt. Another thing that a scintillator detector can do in principle, unlike a GM, is measure the spectrum of X-ray/gamma coming in. This can be fun if you want to identify specific isotopes or do other interesting experiments. I don’t think that’s useful in an emergency. The Better Geiger does not have that spectrum-measuring capability built in yet. The gold standard hobbyist option for measuring a spectrum is probably the Radiacode-101 at roughly $400. It is a great device with a lot of features, but still poor beta sensitivity and – in my experience – the dose calculation algorithm is very poor, and it dramatically overestimates dose at lower gamma energies, but I suspect they will improve that in the firmware eventually. Going up in price and performance from there you quickly get towards the $1000+ range if you want a spectrum-capable detector.

What if I want to measure radioactive antiques? Uranium glass antiques or “Fiestaware” (or similar ceramics with uranium-containing glaze) are a popular item to search for with a radiation detector in antique shops or similar places. For that purpose you should get a detector with a traditional Geiger tube inside for the added beta sensitivity. Those objects primarily emit low energy beta. The Better Geiger will react to those objects, you can use it to verify if an antique contains uranium or not, but it takes a measurement of a couple minutes to do so, whereas with a GM you can usually tell in a couple seconds.

What measurement range do I need? Some people think you need an extremely high range device for an emergency scenario. The Better Geiger officially goes to roughly 5-10 mSv/hr depending on the spectrum. Unofficially I think it will measure reasonably well much higher than that, like maybe 30-40 mSv/hr, but I have not yet gotten around to properly test and characterize that higher range yet so I don’t list that in the specs. To get into acute radiation poising you need around 1000 mSv or so. At a rate of 40 mSv/hr you would reach that in 24 hours. This is an incredibly high dose rate and one you are very unlikely to experience even in an emergency scenario. The vast, vast majority of people will not experience levels above that even in the event of a nuclear blast. It’s up to you if you think it’s worth it having higher range. I don’t personally think it’s any significant added value. The only low cost high range device of I’m aware of is then nukalert. I don’t have personal experience with it but it seems to be a decent device.

What about sodium iodide? tl;dr it's not as important as you think, I wouldn't worry about it if you don't have it. The CDC link at the start covers that topic.
