I often hear non-preppers ask why I prep.

Simply put emergencies happen that's why.  From storms and tornadoes to earthquakes and wild  fires there are many events that nature puts in our path which we have no control over.  
	
When we fail to plan for the future including emergencies we are actively working against not only our interests but that of society as well.  When a disaster strikes we unnaturally expect others to come and bring things “back to normal” immediately.  For some it is an expectation that it is the Government's responsibility while others demand charities to step in.  Regardless of our particular viewpoint on this issue, as adults we are expected to generally look after our selves on a daily basis.  Why then would we have any other expectation when faced with an emergency or natural disaster?  Granted we do have Fire, EMS and Police services. These local organizations were neither created nor funded with a primary goal of removing any thought to large scale emergencies.  Therefore I argue that the onus of preparing for any natural or man-made disaster starts and ends with each one of us.
	
Additionally when we fail to prepare for emergencies and become either; statistics or refuges dependent on others, we burden society as a whole and slow progress.  We do this by demanding resources be diverted to our relief and comfort with no regard to the consequences of this demand.  Higher taxes, changes in fundamental liberties and more complex bureaucracies are the rewards we reap from this mindset.  When we fail to prepare we force our friends and neighbors whether willing or not to share the burden caused by our neglect.  We have become unknowingly a detriment to future generations.  Why would we knowingly allow this to happen?  Arrogance, indifference or perhaps not knowing where to start.
	
I am not advocating for full self reliance nor the dissolution of any emergency response personnel or plan already in place.  I am rather advocating for each of us to take more personal responsibility for our well being. When we are prepared not only do we lessen the strain on public services we also place ourselves in a position to help rather than hinder.  A choice therefore falls to you.  Do you sit idly by ignoring the well being of not only yourself but of your friends, family and neighbors or do you start to actively prepare?  

The choice is yours and yours alone to make.
